docs/README.md, before:

# Tendermint

Welcome to the Tendermint Core documentation!

Tendermint Core is a blockchain application platform; it provides the equivalent
of a web-server, database, and supporting libraries for blockchain applications
written in any programming language. Like a web-server serving web applications,
Tendermint serves blockchain applications.

More formally, Tendermint Core performs Byzantine Fault Tolerant (BFT)
State Machine Replication (SMR) for arbitrary deterministic, finite state machines.
For more background, see [What is
Tendermint?](introduction/what-is-tendermint.md).

To get started quickly with an example application, see the [quick start guide](introduction/quick-start.md).

To learn about application development on Tendermint, see the [Application Blockchain Interface](https://github.com/tendermint/spec/tree/master/spec/abci).

For more details on using Tendermint, see the respective documentation for
[Tendermint Core](tendermint-core/), [benchmarking and monitoring](tools/), and [network deployments](networks/).

To find out about the Tendermint ecosystem you can go [here](https://github.com/tendermint/awesome#ecosystem). If you are a project that is using Tendermint you are welcome to make a PR to add your project to the list.

## Contribute

To contribute to the documentation, see [this file](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/master/docs/DOCS_README.md) for details of the build process and
considerations when making changes.

Commit message:

docs: update .vuepress/config.js (#5043)
## Description

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1021101/86193320-7aa13200-bb00-11ea-95ac-aa6468ab7f46.png)


### Next steps:
- [x] bump vuepress-theme-cosmos version
- [x] tweak config.js
- [x] update color variables
- [x] sh, shell → bash for syntax highlighting

docs/README.md, after:

---
title: Tendermint Core Documentation
description: Tendermint Core is a blockchain application platform.
footer:
  newsletter: false
---

# Tendermint

Welcome to the Tendermint Core documentation!

Tendermint Core is a blockchain application platform; it provides the equivalent
of a web-server, database, and supporting libraries for blockchain applications
written in any programming language. Like a web-server serving web applications,
Tendermint serves blockchain applications.

More formally, Tendermint Core performs Byzantine Fault Tolerant (BFT)
State Machine Replication (SMR) for arbitrary deterministic, finite state machines.
For more background, see [What is
Tendermint?](introduction/what-is-tendermint.md).

To get started quickly with an example application, see the [quick start guide](introduction/quick-start.md).

To learn about application development on Tendermint, see the [Application Blockchain Interface](https://github.com/tendermint/spec/tree/master/spec/abci).

For more details on using Tendermint, see the respective documentation for
[Tendermint Core](tendermint-core/), [benchmarking and monitoring](tools/), and [network deployments](networks/).

To find out about the Tendermint ecosystem you can go [here](https://github.com/tendermint/awesome#ecosystem). If you are a project that is using Tendermint you are welcome to make a PR to add your project to the list.

## Contribute

To contribute to the documentation, see [this file](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/master/docs/DOCS_README.md) for details of the build process and considerations when making changes.
