crypto/README.md, before:

# crypto

crypto is the cryptographic package adapted for Tendermint's uses

## Importing it

To get the interfaces,
`import "github.com/tendermint/tendermint/crypto"`

For any specific algorithm, use its specific module e.g.
`import "github.com/tendermint/tendermint/crypto/ed25519"`

If you want to decode bytes into one of the types, but don't care about the specific algorithm, use
`import "github.com/tendermint/tendermint/crypto/amino"`

## Binary encoding

For Binary encoding, please refer to the [Tendermint encoding specification](https://docs.tendermint.com/master/spec/blockchain/encoding.html).

## JSON Encoding

crypto `.Bytes()` uses Amino:binary encoding, but Amino:JSON is also supported.

```go
Example Amino:JSON encodings:

ed25519.PrivKey     - {"type":"tendermint/PrivKeyEd25519","value":"EVkqJO/jIXp3rkASXfh9YnyToYXRXhBr6g9cQVxPFnQBP/5povV4HTjvsy530kybxKHwEi85iU8YL0qQhSYVoQ=="}
ed25519.PubKey      - {"type":"tendermint/PubKeyEd25519","value":"AT/+aaL1eB0477Mud9JMm8Sh8BIvOYlPGC9KkIUmFaE="}
sr25519.PrivKeySr25519   - {"type":"tendermint/PrivKeySr25519","value":"xtYVH8UCIqfrY8FIFc0QEpAEBShSG4NT0zlEOVSZ2w4="}
sr25519.PubKeySr25519    - {"type":"tendermint/PubKeySr25519","value":"8sKBLKQ/OoXMcAJVxBqz1U7TyxRFQ5cmliuHy4MrF0s="}
crypto.PrivKeySecp256k1   - {"type":"tendermint/PrivKeySecp256k1","value":"zx4Pnh67N+g2V+5vZbQzEyRerX9c4ccNZOVzM9RvJ0Y="}
crypto.PubKeySecp256k1    - {"type":"tendermint/PubKeySecp256k1","value":"A8lPKJXcNl5VHt1FK8a244K9EJuS4WX1hFBnwisi0IJx"}
```

Commit message:

crypto: reword readme (#5349)
## Description

Reword the readme of the crypto package. 

Closes: #XXX

crypto/README.md, after:

# crypto

crypto is the cryptographic package adapted for Tendermint's uses

## Importing it

To get the interfaces,
`import "github.com/tendermint/tendermint/crypto"`

For any specific algorithm, use its specific module e.g.
`import "github.com/tendermint/tendermint/crypto/ed25519"`

## Binary encoding

For Binary encoding, please refer to the [Tendermint encoding specification](https://docs.tendermint.com/master/spec/blockchain/encoding.html).

## JSON Encoding

JSON encoding is done using tendermint's internal json encoder. For more information on JSON encoding, please refer to [Tendermint JSON encoding](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/ccc990498df70f5a3df06d22476c9bb83812cbe3/libs/json/doc.go)

```go
Example JSON encodings:

ed25519.PrivKey     - {"type":"tendermint/PrivKeyEd25519","value":"EVkqJO/jIXp3rkASXfh9YnyToYXRXhBr6g9cQVxPFnQBP/5povV4HTjvsy530kybxKHwEi85iU8YL0qQhSYVoQ=="}
ed25519.PubKey      - {"type":"tendermint/PubKeyEd25519","value":"AT/+aaL1eB0477Mud9JMm8Sh8BIvOYlPGC9KkIUmFaE="}
sr25519.PrivKeySr25519   - {"type":"tendermint/PrivKeySr25519","value":"xtYVH8UCIqfrY8FIFc0QEpAEBShSG4NT0zlEOVSZ2w4="}
sr25519.PubKeySr25519    - {"type":"tendermint/PubKeySr25519","value":"8sKBLKQ/OoXMcAJVxBqz1U7TyxRFQ5cmliuHy4MrF0s="}
crypto.PrivKeySecp256k1   - {"type":"tendermint/PrivKeySecp256k1","value":"zx4Pnh67N+g2V+5vZbQzEyRerX9c4ccNZOVzM9RvJ0Y="}
crypto.PubKeySecp256k1    - {"type":"tendermint/PubKeySecp256k1","value":"A8lPKJXcNl5VHt1FK8a244K9EJuS4WX1hFBnwisi0IJx"}
```
